# <h1> Denial of Service </h1>
My goal with this section is to simply explain the basic idea of Denial of Service attacks. DoS attacks often get a lot of attention online due to the disruption they can cause everyday users, but I find that often explanations of them seem longwinded. I will attempt to break down DoS attacks (specifically DDoS and amplified DDoS) in a way that a layman could understand. I'll add some images along the way to keep things clear <br><br>
Let's start with a basic definition of Denial of Service attacks and then build from there. The simplest definition of a DoS attack is written right in the name. It constitutes any attack through any means that aims to deny service to users. The most famous examples can indeed be complicated setups involving botnets and clever attack vectors, but the simplest DoS attack would probably be just.. unplugging the server. Or cutting power to the building containing the server! These seem like crude methods but they definitely get the job done. However we don't often hear about attacks like these in the news as they usually require physical access to the building, and attackers often would like to remain as faaaar away as they can from their targets. So how do they actually do it?
<h2>How They Actually Do It</h2>
As with all good explanations I'll digress into some heavy metaphor. We can think of most communication on the internet as a conversation between two or more people, save that the people are computers and servers. Let's imagine the conversation as a situation in a restaurant. In many conversations over the internet, the client will send a series of requests to a server, and the server will respond with whatever information the client requested. This will go back and forth until the client is satisfied, and they leave. In a lot of ways this situation resembles a restaurant. You the customer would be the client, the restaurant would be the server providing a service, and the waiter or table would represent the connection between you two. You arrive, make requests, and receive information(food). When you're satisfied, you close the connection, or in other words leave the restaurant. <br><br>
But what if I'm a malicious customer out on the internet, and I don't actually *want* to be served successfully? Instead, my goal is to deny service to all other customers! The easiest way to do that would probably be to refuse to give up my table(connection). I might make endless requests to my waiter and keep them busy at my table so they can't focus on anyone else. Eventually they might get fed up and deny me service altogether, but it's relatively easy to mask my identity and walk right back into the restaurant to hold another table hostage for a while! In the end though, I'm only one person, and the restaurant I'm attacking might have hundreds or thousands of open tables and waiters to staff them. How can I possibly affect the service around here all by myself?<br><br>
<h2>Distributed Denial of Service(DDoS)</h2>
Make your Denial of Service attack exponentially stronger with this one easy trick! The idea behind it is simple: why attack the restaurant alone, when I can have help from thousands of computers around the world? If I walk into the restaurant with one thousand of my henchmen I could very feasibly reserve all the tables and waiters until no one could eat but myself! By one method or another (usually spreading malicious programs online) these attackers gain control of innocent computers all over the world. Their software sits idly in the background waiting for a signal from the master computer. When the attacker wants to deny service at a restaurant, they send out an alert to all infected computers. "Get in line for Restaurant A!". These groups of computers, often called botnets, are so widespread and effective that they will rent out their services for hire. 
<h2>What is Denial of Service amplification?</h2>
Thankfully in the modern world we've gotten quite good at detecting DDoS attacks and mitigate them. If you've ever connected to a website and seen your webpage say "CloudFlare verifying connection . . ." then that website is checking to see if your computer has some legitimate business to conduct.
Because of this, malicious actors online that would like to deny service have had to get much more creative, employing something called DoS amplification. Instead of hiring more henchmen to take up more and more tables, the idea is to somehow make your attack stronger with the tables that you already take up. <br><br>In order to return to the restaurant metaphor above, let's now think about the physical mailbox of the restaurant. If that physical mailbox were to be stuffed full of letters, they wouldn't be able to receive any mail for a while: a Denial of Service. However as I said, we've got to do what we can with only ourselves. I myself could crank out a few dozen letters a day, but nowhere near enough to fill up the mailbox. What if, instead of sending my mail to the restaurant, I sent it to the biggest restaurant across the street? Imagine my letter says this: "Dear Restaurant B, what time is it? Kindest Regards, Restaurant A". As you can see, I've made a very simple request, but I've forged the letter to make it appear that my target is the sender. Finally at the bottom, I'll add the one sentence that makes this an amplification attack: <br><br>"P.S. <b>Please respond one thousand times"</b>. <br><br>Restaurant B checks its mail, and decides that asking the time is a perfectly innocent request - and with its powerful employees(servers) it immediately forwards a thousand letters to Restaurant A.<br><br>
As you can see, all I had to write was a single letter, but because Restaurant B believed my request to be in good faith, they ended up performing the attack on my behalf. I have amplified the effectiveness of my attack through an innocent third party. Thankfully, defenses against this attack type are getting better every day. Servers around the world are mre and more careful what kind of letters they will willingly forward in good faith.
